DOCS-3472: Add documentation for Viam Apps (#4335)
viamrobotics/docs: docs/operate/control/viam-app.md

---
title: "Create a Viam app"

> linkTitle: "Create a Viam app"

Reviewer: as discussed - no

weight: 5
layout: "docs"
type: "docs"

> description: "Create and deploy custom web interfaces for your machines without managing hosting and authentication."

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
description: "Create and deploy a custom web interface for your machines without managing hosting and authentication."
```
[opt]

> description: "Create and deploy custom web interfaces for your machines as single-page applications without managing hosting and authentication."

Reviewer 3: Discussed on Slack- I think we should remove any mention of "single-page"

---

> Create and deploy custom web interfaces for your machines without managing hosting and authentication.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Create and deploy a custom web interface for your machines without managing hosting and authentication.
```
[opt] I think this makes it sound more how-to-ish and less marketing-ish

> Once deployed, apps are accessible from a dedicated URL (`appname_publicnamespace.viamapplications.com`) and hosting and authentication is handled for you.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once deployed, your app is accessible from a dedicated URL (`appname_publicnamespace.viamapplications.com`), and hosting and authentication is handled for you.
```
[opt] To match above opt comment

> When opening an app, users log in and then select a machine they have access to.
> Then your app is rendered and ready for use.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Users log into your app and select a machine they have access to.
The app then renders your custom interface for interacting with the user's machine.
```
Or something....this just feels a bit passive or AI-generated or somehow off.

{{<gif webm_src="/spa.webm" mp4_src="/spa.mp4" alt="Sample web app" max-width="500px">}}

## Requirements

{{< expand "Install the Viam CLI and authenticate." >}}
Install the Viam CLI using the option below that matches your system architecture:

{{< readfile "/static/include/how-to/install-cli.md" >}}

Then authenticate your CLI session with Viam using one of the following options:

{{< readfile "/static/include/how-to/auth-cli.md" >}}

{{< /expand >}}

## Build a custom web interface

You can build a custom web interface to access your machines using your preferred framework like React, Vue, Angular, or others.

### Access machines from your app

> Viam apps provide access to a machine by placing its API key in your cookies.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Viam single-page apps provide access to a machine by placing its API key in your cookies.
```
Also, to whom do they provide access? Is this how the apps themselves access the machines? Consider rewriting for less ambiguity

> Viam apps provide access to a machine by placing its API key in your cookies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When logging into a Viam app, its API key is stored as a cookie.
```

You can access the data from your browser's cookies as follows:

```ts {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers" data-line=""}
import Cookies from "js-cookie";

let apiKeyId = "";
let apiKeySecret = "";
let hostname = "";
let machineId = "";

machineId = window.location.pathname.split("/")[2];
({
  id: apiKeyId,
  key: apiKeySecret,
  hostname: hostname,
} = JSON.parse(Cookies.get(machineId)!));
```

> For developing your app on localhost, add the same information to your browser's cookies.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For developing your app on localhost, add the same information to your browser's cookies:
```
[nit]

> For developing your app on localhost, add the same information to your browsers local storage.

Reviewer 3: This is getting removed, right? If so, we'll make sure to ping you when [this](https://viam.atlassian.net/browse/APP-8173) ticket is done so this doc can be updated.

Reviewer: yeah, we won't publish until that ticket is ready. I just thought we were more eager to get this live than we apparently are

> 1. Navigate to [Camera Viewer](https://camera-viewer_naomi.viamapplications.com/).

Reviewer: that'll go away once the cookie issue is fixed so will leave for not

     textarea.style.position = "fixed";
     textarea.style.top = "0";
     textarea.style.left = "0";
     textarea.style.width = "100%";
     textarea.style.height = "250px";
     textarea.style.zIndex = "9999";
     document.body.appendChild(textarea);
     textarea.focus();
     textarea.select();
   }

   // Execute the function
   generateCookieSetterScript();
   ```

5. Copy the resulting script. It will look like this:

   ```js {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers" data-line=""}
   // Cookie setter script for localhost
   // Copy and paste this entire script into your browser console when on localhost

   document.cookie = "<SECRET COOKIE INFO>; path=/";
   document.cookie = "machinesWhoseCredentialsAreStored=<MACHINE ID>; path=/";

   console.log("Set 2 cookies on localhost");
   ```

6. Open the app you are building on localhost and run the resulting script.
7. Reload your app.

### Configure routing

When using your deployed application, static files will be accessible at `https://your-app-name_your-public-namespace.viamapplications.com/machine/<machine-id>/`.
If your HTML file loads other files, use relative paths to ensure your files are accessible.

> ## Deploy your web interface

Reviewer 2: What is meant by "deploy"? Provide a couple sentences explaining

{{< table >}}
{{% tablestep number=1 %}}

> **Create a <FILE>meta.json</FILE>** file using this template:

Reviewer 2: Provide context on what this file does/why I need one

**Register your module** with Viam:

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab name="Template" %}}

```sh {class="command-line" data-prompt="$" data-output="3-10"}
viam module create --name="app-name" --public-namespace="namespace"
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="Example" %}}

```sh {class="command-line" data-prompt="$" data-output="3-10"}
viam module create --name="air-quality" --public-namespace="naomi"
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

{{% /tablestep %}}
{{% tablestep number=3 %}}

**Package your static files and your <FILE>meta.json</FILE> file and upload them** to the Viam Registry:

```sh {class="command-line" data-prompt="$" data-output="3-10"}
tar -czvf module.tar.gz <static-website-files> meta.json
viam module upload --upload=module.tar.gz --platform=any --version=0.0.1
```

For subsequent updates run these commands again with an updated version number.

{{% /tablestep %}}
{{< /table >}}

## Access your app

After uploading your module with the application configuration, your application will be available at:

```txt
https://your-app-name_your-public-namespace.viamapplications.com
```

Users will be prompted to authenticate with their Viam credentials before accessing your application:

> 1. User navigates to `your-app-name_your-public-namespace.viamapplications.com`
> 1. User authenticates with Viam credentials
> 1. User selects an organization, location, and machine
> 1. User is redirected to `your-app-name_your-public-namespace.viamapplications.com/machine/{machine-id}`
> 1. Your application is rendered with access to the selected machine

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. User navigates to `your-app-name_your-public-namespace.viamapplications.com`.
1. User authenticates with Viam credentials.
1. User selects an organization, location, and machine.
1. User is redirected to `your-app-name_your-public-namespace.viamapplications.com/machine/{machine-id}`.
1. Your application is rendered with access to the selected machine.
```
[nits]

## Example

<!-- For a TypeScript example see [Monitor Air Quality with a Fleet of Sensors](/tutorials/control/air-quality-fleet/). -->

For a React app that shows Camera feeds for a machine, see [Viam Camera Viewer](https://github.com/viam-labs/viam-camera-viewer).

## Limitations

> - Apps currently only support single-machine applications
> - All modules with apps must have public visibility
> - There is no separate deploy step; the page will always render the latest version
> - Browsers with cookies disabled are not supported

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Apps currently only support single-machine applications.
- All modules with apps must have public visibility.
- There is no separate deploy step; the page will always render the latest version.
- Browsers with cookies disabled are not supported.
```
[nits]
also, "There is not separate deploy step" is confusing, since there was a section of this page about deployment.

> ## Security Considerations

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Security considerations
```
[nit]

> - Customer apps are stored publicly available on the internet
> - Avoid uploading sensitive information in your application code or assets
> - API keys and secrets are stored in the browser's cookies
> - Authenticate users with FusionAuth

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Customer apps are stored such that they are publicly available on the internet, so avoid uploading sensitive information in your application code or assets.
- API keys and secrets are stored in the browser's cookies.
- Users authenticate with FusionAuth.
```
grammar, periods, and parallel structure

> - API keys and secrets are stored in the browser's localStorage or sessionStorage

Reviewer 3: Same as previous comment, stored in cookies rather than `localStorage` or `sessionStorage`

Once deployed, your app is accessible from a dedicated URL (`appname_publicnamespace.viamapplications.com`), and hosting and authentication is handled for you.

Users log into your app and select a machine they have access to.
The app then renders your custom interface for interacting with the user's machine.

{{<gif webm_src="/spa.webm" mp4_src="/spa.mp4" alt="Sample web app" max-width="500px">}}

## Requirements

{{< expand "Install the Viam CLI and authenticate." >}}
Install the Viam CLI using the option below that matches your system architecture:

{{< readfile "/static/include/how-to/install-cli.md" >}}

Then authenticate your CLI session with Viam using one of the following options:

{{< readfile "/static/include/how-to/auth-cli.md" >}}

{{< /expand >}}

## Build a custom web interface

You can build a custom web interface to access your machines using your preferred framework like React, Vue, Angular, or others.

### Access machines from your app

When logging into a Viam app and selecting a machine to use it with, the machine's API key is stored as a cookie.
You can access the data from your browser's cookies as follows:

> 
> ```ts {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers" data-line=""}
> import Cookies from "js-cookie";
> 
> let apiKeyId = "";
> let apiKeySecret = "";
> let hostname = "";
> let machineId = "";
> 
> machineId = window.location.pathname.split("/")[2];
> ({
>   id: apiKeyId,
>   key: apiKeySecret,
>   hostname: hostname,
> } = JSON.parse(Cookies.get(machineId)!));
> ```

Reviewer 4: made a slight change to how we're populating these values in [here](https://github.com/viamrobotics/viam-apps/pull/47/files#diff-8a2a19b54aa1a9aeca1c9cc113bc82d8b44be00b2293e43e706a10709b888654R155). main difference is that the URL path can _either_ be the hostname OR the machineID, so users should rely on the cookie values for these instead of assuming path is machine ID. i also nested api credentials inside of an apiKey field. can we update the this pr to reflect this? should be something lke this (not sure if my js syntax is right) 
```suggestion

```ts {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers" data-line=""}
import Cookies from "js-cookie";

let apiKeyId = "";
let apiKeySecret = "";
let hostname = "";
let machineId = "";

machineInfo = window.location.pathname.split("/")[2];
({
  apiKey?.id: apiKeyId,
  apiKey?.key: apiKeySecret,
  hostname: hostname,
  machineId: machineId
} = JSON.parse(Cookies.get(machineInfo)!));
```
```

Reviewer 4: feel free to DM me if you have qs! right now, i'm supporting both old and new formats and pinging people to update their apps (only really gambit + eliot) but after docs are out will remove support for the old format
